docs/development.md, before:

<!--
Copyright 2025 Alexander Alten (novatechflow), NovaTechflow (novatechflow.com).
This project is supported and financed by Scalytics, Inc. (www.scalytics.io).

Licensed under the Apache License, Version 2.0 (the "License");
you may not use this file except in compliance with the License.
You may obtain a copy of the License at

    http://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0

Unless required by applicable law or agreed to in writing, software
distributed under the License is distributed on an "AS IS" BASIS,
WITHOUT WARRANTIES OR CONDITIONS OF ANY KIND, either express or implied.
See the License for the specific language governing permissions and
limitations under the License.
-->

# Development Guide

This document tracks the steps needed to work on Kafscale. It complements the architecture spec in `kafscale-spec.md`.

## Quickstart (Local)

```bash
make build
make test
```

## Prerequisites

- Go 1.22+ (the module currently targets Go 1.25)
- `buf` (https://buf.build/docs/installation/) for protobuf builds
- `protoc` plus the `protoc-gen-go` and `protoc-gen-go-grpc` plugins (installed automatically by `buf` if you use the managed mode)
- Docker + Kubernetes CLI tools if you plan to iterate on the operator

## Repository Layout

- `cmd/broker`, `cmd/operator`: binary entry points
- `pkg/`: Go libraries (protocol, storage, broker, operator)
- `proto/`: protobuf definitions for metadata and internal control plane APIs
- `pkg/gen/`: auto-generated protobuf + gRPC Go code (ignored until `buf generate` runs)
- `docs/`: specs and this guide
- `test/`: integration + e2e suites
- `docs/storage.md`: deeper design notes for the storage subsystem, including S3 client expectations

Refer to `kafscale-spec.md` for the detailed package-by-package breakdown.

## Common Commands

| Command | Purpose |
|---------|---------|
| `make build` | Compile all Go binaries. |
| `make test` | Run unit tests (includes `go vet` and race detector). |
| `make test-produce-consume` | MinIO + Franz produce/consume e2e suite plus Kafka CLI producer smoke test (Docker image required). |
| `make test-consumer-group` | Consumer group persistence e2e (embedded etcd + memory S3). |
| `make test-ops-api` | Ops/admin API e2e (embedded etcd + memory S3). |
| `make test-multi-segment-durability` | Multi-segment restart durability e2e (embedded etcd + MinIO). |
| `make test-full` | Unit tests plus local e2e suites. |
| `make test-operator` | Operator envtest + optional kind-based integration. |
| `make demo` | Local demo with broker + console + embedded etcd. |
| `make demo-platform` | Kind-based demo (operator HA + managed etcd + console). |
| `make docker-build` | Build broker/operator/console images locally. |
| `make docker-clean` | Remove dev images + Docker caches. |
| `make stop-containers` | Stop leftover MinIO/kind containers. |
| `make tidy` | Clean go.mod/go.sum. |
| `make lint` | Run golangci-lint (requires installation). |
| `make help` | List all Makefile targets. |

## Generating Protobuf Code

We use `buf` to manage protobuf builds. All metadata schemas and control-plane RPCs live under `proto/`.

```bash
brew install buf      # or equivalent
make proto            # runs `buf generate`
```

The generated Go code goes into `pkg/gen/{metadata,control}`. Do not edit generated files manually—re-run `make proto` whenever the `.proto` sources change.

## Release Workflow

We publish container images and GitHub releases from tags. This keeps release artifacts reproducible and aligned with the Helm chart.

- Tag format: `vX.Y.Z` for stable releases, `vX.Y.Z-rc.N` or `vX.Y.Z-dev.N` for prereleases.
- Tag push triggers the Docker workflow to build and push `kafscale-broker`, `kafscale-operator`, and `kafscale-console` images to GHCR.
- The workflow also creates a GitHub release with autogenerated notes.
- The Helm chart defaults image tags to `appVersion`, so bump `deploy/helm/kafscale/Chart.yaml` `version` and `appVersion` for each release. Users can override `operator.image.tag`, `console.image.tag`, and `operator.brokerImage.tag` to pin a specific version, or set `operator.image.useLatest=true`, `console.image.useLatest=true`, and `operator.brokerImage.useLatest=true` for dev/latest installs.
- Release notes live in `docs/releases/` and should include a human-readable summary plus a "Security fixes" section listing any known CVEs addressed (or "None").
- Optional: create a prep branch named `prep-vX.Y.Z` to stage release notes and Helm chart bumps before tagging.

## Testing Expectations

Pull requests must include strict test coverage for the changes they introduce. At a minimum:

- Add or extend unit tests for all non-trivial logic.
- Run the relevant e2e suite(s); changes to broker behavior should run `make test-produce-consume` and any related e2e tests.
- Extend e2e coverage when you fix bugs so regressions are caught earlier.

To add headers to new files, run `python3 hack/license_headers.py`.

## Test Workflows (Details)

### Local MinIO / S3 setup

`make test-produce-consume` assumes there is an S3 endpoint in front of the broker, so we keep a local MinIO container (`kafscale-minio`) running to exercise a production-like S3 stack.

Default MinIO settings (used when `KAFSCALE_USE_MEMORY_S3=1` is not set):

| Setting | Value |
|---------|-------|
| Endpoint | `http://127.0.0.1:9000` |
| Bucket | `kafscale` |
| Region | `us-east-1` |
| Addressing | Path-style |

To point at a different S3-compatible endpoint, set the `KAFSCALE_S3_*` variables listed under Environment Variables. To skip MinIO entirely, set `KAFSCALE_USE_MEMORY_S3=1` and the broker uses the in-memory S3 client for faster, deterministic runs.

Related targets:
- `make test-produce-consume` runs the MinIO-backed produce/consume suite plus a Kafka CLI producer smoke test (configure `KAFSCALE_KAFKA_CLI_IMAGE` / `KAFSCALE_KAFKA_CLI_CMD` if needed).
- `make test-produce-consume-debug` adds Kafka trace logging (`KAFSCALE_LOG_LEVEL=debug`, `KAFSCALE_TRACE_KAFKA=true`).
- `make test-consumer-group` and `make test-ops-api` use embedded etcd + in-memory S3.
- `make test-multi-segment-durability` uses MinIO and restarts the broker across multiple segment flushes.
- `make stop-containers` stops leftover MinIO/kind helper containers before re-running tests.

### Demo workflow

Need an interactive run? `make demo` boots embedded etcd plus the broker + console, opens `http://127.0.0.1:48080/ui/`, and keeps everything running until you hit `Ctrl+C`. It is the quickest way to click around the UI while real messages flow through the broker/MinIO stack.

The demo wires `KAFSCALE_CONSOLE_BROKER_METRICS_URL=http://127.0.0.1:39093/metrics` so the console scrapes broker Prometheus metrics and populates the S3/metrics cards with live data. Any other process starting `cmd/console` can set the same env var (for example, `go run ./cmd/console`) to render broker-reported S3 state/latency instead of the mock placeholders.

The broker exports live throughput gauges (`kafscale_produce_rps` / `kafscale_fetch_rps`) so the UI can show messages-per-second alongside S3 latency. The sliding window defaults to 60 seconds; override it with `KAFSCALE_THROUGHPUT_WINDOW_SEC` before starting the broker if you want a shorter (spikier) or longer (smoother) view.

### Operator envtest (no kind)

`TestOperatorManagedEtcdResources` uses controller-runtime envtest to validate operator reconciliation without spinning up kind. Install envtest assets with `setup-envtest` or set `KUBEBUILDER_ASSETS` to a directory containing `kube-apiserver` and `etcd` binaries.

Recommended setup (using `setup-envtest`):

```bash
go install sigs.k8s.io/controller-runtime/tools/setup-envtest@latest
export KUBEBUILDER_ASSETS="$(setup-envtest use -p path 1.29.x)"
```

### Broker logging levels

The broker reads `KAFSCALE_LOG_LEVEL` at start-up. If the variable is unset we operate in warning-and-above mode, which keeps regular e2e/test runs quiet. Set `KAFSCALE_LOG_LEVEL=info` or `debug` (optionally together with `KAFSCALE_TRACE_KAFKA=true`) when you need additional visibility; the `test-produce-consume-debug` target wires those env vars up for you.

## Environment Variables

### Test and E2E

- `KAFSCALE_E2E` – Enable e2e tests.
- `KAFSCALE_E2E_KIND` – Enable kind-based e2e.
- `KAFSCALE_KIND_CLUSTER` – Kind cluster name.
- `KAFSCALE_KIND_RECREATE` – Force kind cluster recreation.
- `KAFSCALE_E2E_DEMO` – Run demo stack test.
- `KAFSCALE_E2E_OPEN_UI` – Open UI during demo test.
- `KAFSCALE_E2E_DEBUG` – Enable debug output in e2e tests.
- `KAFSCALE_BROKER_IMAGE`, `KAFSCALE_OPERATOR_IMAGE`, `KAFSCALE_CONSOLE_IMAGE` – Image overrides for kind e2e.
- `KAFSCALE_LOCAL_FRANZ` – Use local franz-go build in tests.

### Demo workload tuning

- `KAFSCALE_DEMO_BROKER_ADDR`
- `KAFSCALE_DEMO_TOPICS`
- `KAFSCALE_DEMO_MESSAGES_PER_SEC`
- `KAFSCALE_DEMO_GROUP`

### Broker / S3

- `KAFSCALE_S3_BUCKET`
- `KAFSCALE_S3_REGION`
- `KAFSCALE_S3_NAMESPACE`
- `KAFSCALE_S3_ENDPOINT`
- `KAFSCALE_S3_PATH_STYLE`
- `KAFSCALE_S3_KMS_ARN`
- `KAFSCALE_S3_ACCESS_KEY`
- `KAFSCALE_S3_SECRET_KEY`
- `KAFSCALE_S3_SESSION_TOKEN`
- `KAFSCALE_USE_MEMORY_S3`
- `KAFSCALE_THROUGHPUT_WINDOW_SEC`

### Broker logging

- `KAFSCALE_LOG_LEVEL`
- `KAFSCALE_TRACE_KAFKA`

### Operator / etcd

- `KAFSCALE_ETCD_ENDPOINTS`
- `KAFSCALE_ETCD_USERNAME`
- `KAFSCALE_ETCD_PASSWORD`

## Kafka Compatibility Tracking

To stay Kafka-compatible we track every protocol key + version that upstream exposes. Upstream Kafka 3.7.0 currently advertises the following highest ApiVersions (see `kafka-protocol` docs):

| API Key | Name | Kafka 3.7 Version | Kafscale Status |
|---------|------|-------------------|-----------------|
| 0 | Produce | 9 | ✅ Implemented |
| 1 | Fetch | 13 | ✅ Implemented |
| 2 | ListOffsets | 7 | ✅ Implemented (v0-4) |
| 3 | Metadata | 12 | ✅ Implemented |
| 4 | LeaderAndIsr | 5 | ❌ Not needed (internal) |
| 5 | StopReplica | 3 | ❌ Not needed (internal) |
| 6 | UpdateMetadata | 7 | ❌ Not needed (internal) |
| 7 | ControlledShutdown | 3 | ❌ Replaced by Kubernetes rollouts |
| 8 | OffsetCommit | 3 | ✅ Implemented |
| 9 | OffsetFetch | 5 | ✅ Implemented |
| 10 | FindCoordinator | 3 | ✅ Implemented |
| 11 | JoinGroup | 4 | ✅ Implemented |
| 12 | Heartbeat | 4 | ✅ Implemented |
| 13 | LeaveGroup | 4 | ✅ Implemented |
| 14 | SyncGroup | 4 | ✅ Implemented |
| 15 | DescribeGroups | 5 | ✅ Implemented |
| 16 | ListGroups | 5 | ✅ Implemented |
| 17 | SaslHandshake | 1 | ❌ Authentication not in scope yet |
| 18 | ApiVersions | 3 | ✅ Implemented (v0-3) |
| 19 | CreateTopics | 7 | ✅ Implemented (v0-2) |
| 20 | DeleteTopics | 6 | ✅ Implemented (v0-2) |
| 21 | DeleteRecords | 2 | ❌ Rely on S3 lifecycle |
| 22 | InitProducerId | 4 | ❌ Transactions out of scope |
| 23 | OffsetForLeaderEpoch | 3 | ✅ Implemented |
| 24 | AddPartitionsToTxn | 3 | ❌ Transactions out of scope |
| 25 | AddOffsetsToTxn | 3 | ❌ Transactions out of scope |
| 26 | EndTxn | 3 | ❌ Transactions out of scope |
| 27 | WriteTxnMarkers | 0 | ❌ Transactions out of scope |
| 28 | TxnOffsetCommit | 3 | ❌ Transactions out of scope |
| 29 | DescribeAcls | 1 | ❌ Auth not in v1 |
| 30 | CreateAcls | 1 | ❌ Auth not in v1 |
| 31 | DeleteAcls | 1 | ❌ Auth not in v1 |
| 32 | DescribeConfigs | 4 | ✅ Implemented |
| 33 | AlterConfigs | 1 | ✅ Implemented |
| 34 | AlterReplicaLogDirs | 1 | ❌ Not relevant (S3 backed) |
| 35 | DescribeLogDirs | 1 | ❌ Not relevant (S3 backed) |
| 36 | SaslAuthenticate | 2 | ❌ Auth not in v1 |
| 37 | CreatePartitions | 0-3 | ✅ Implemented |
| 38 | CreateDelegationToken | 2 | ❌ Auth not in v1 |
| 39 | RenewDelegationToken | 2 | ❌ Auth not in v1 |
| 40 | ExpireDelegationToken | 2 | ❌ Auth not in v1 |
| 41 | DescribeDelegationToken | 2 | ❌ Auth not in v1 |
| 42 | DeleteGroups | 0-2 | ✅ Implemented |

We revisit this table each milestone. Anything marked 🔜 or ❌ has a pointer in the spec backlog so we can track when to bring it online (e.g., DescribeGroups/ListGroups for Kafka UI parity, OffsetForLeaderEpoch for catch-up tooling).

## Coding Standards

- Keep all new code documented in `kafscale-spec.md` or cross-link back to the spec
- Favor context-rich structured logging (zerolog) and Prometheus metrics
- Protobufs should remain backward compatible; prefer adding optional fields over rewriting existing ones
- No stream processing primitives in the broker—hand those workloads off to Flink/Wayang or equivalent engines
- Every change must land with unit tests, smoke/integration coverage, and regression tests where appropriate; skipping tests requires an explicit TODO anchored to a tracking issue.
- Secrets live only in Kubernetes; never write S3 or etcd credentials into source control or etcd. Reference them via `credentialsSecretRef` and let the operator project them at runtime.
- When testing against etcd locally, set `KAFSCALE_ETCD_ENDPOINTS` (comma-separated), plus `KAFSCALE_ETCD_USERNAME` / `KAFSCALE_ETCD_PASSWORD` if auth is enabled. The broker will fall back to the in-memory store when those vars are absent.

Commit message:

Add Kafka proxy deployment and demo wiring
Introduce the Kafka proxy image + Helm resources, wire demo-platform to use it by default, and add proxy build targets. This provides external bootstrap access for scaled brokers. Fixes #42.

docs/development.md, after:

<!--
Copyright 2025 Alexander Alten (novatechflow), NovaTechflow (novatechflow.com).
This project is supported and financed by Scalytics, Inc. (www.scalytics.io).

Licensed under the Apache License, Version 2.0 (the "License");
you may not use this file except in compliance with the License.
You may obtain a copy of the License at

    http://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0

Unless required by applicable law or agreed to in writing, software
distributed under the License is distributed on an "AS IS" BASIS,
WITHOUT WARRANTIES OR CONDITIONS OF ANY KIND, either express or implied.
See the License for the specific language governing permissions and
limitations under the License.
-->

# Development Guide

This document tracks the steps needed to work on Kafscale. It complements the architecture spec in `kafscale-spec.md`.

## Quickstart (Local)

```bash
make build
make test
```

## Prerequisites

- Go 1.22+ (the module currently targets Go 1.25)
- `buf` (https://buf.build/docs/installation/) for protobuf builds
- `protoc` plus the `protoc-gen-go` and `protoc-gen-go-grpc` plugins (installed automatically by `buf` if you use the managed mode)
- Docker + Kubernetes CLI tools if you plan to iterate on the operator

## Repository Layout

- `cmd/broker`, `cmd/operator`: binary entry points
- `pkg/`: Go libraries (protocol, storage, broker, operator)
- `proto/`: protobuf definitions for metadata and internal control plane APIs
- `pkg/gen/`: auto-generated protobuf + gRPC Go code (ignored until `buf generate` runs)
- `docs/`: specs and this guide
- `test/`: integration + e2e suites
- `docs/storage.md`: deeper design notes for the storage subsystem, including S3 client expectations

Refer to `kafscale-spec.md` for the detailed package-by-package breakdown.

## Common Commands

| Command | Purpose |
|---------|---------|
| `make build` | Compile all Go binaries. |
| `make test` | Run unit tests (includes `go vet` and race detector). |
| `make test-produce-consume` | MinIO + Franz produce/consume e2e suite plus Kafka CLI producer smoke test (Docker image required). |
| `make test-consumer-group` | Consumer group persistence e2e (embedded etcd + memory S3). |
| `make test-ops-api` | Ops/admin API e2e (embedded etcd + memory S3). |
| `make test-multi-segment-durability` | Multi-segment restart durability e2e (embedded etcd + MinIO). |
| `make test-full` | Unit tests plus local e2e suites. |
| `make test-operator` | Operator envtest + optional kind-based integration. |
| `make demo` | Local demo with broker + console + embedded etcd. |
| `make demo-platform` | Kind-based demo (operator HA + managed etcd + console). |
| `make docker-build` | Build broker/operator/console images locally. |
| `make docker-clean` | Remove dev images + Docker caches. |
| `make stop-containers` | Stop leftover MinIO/kind containers. |
| `make tidy` | Clean go.mod/go.sum. |
| `make lint` | Run golangci-lint (requires installation). |
| `make help` | List all Makefile targets. |

## Local Limits (kind + e2e)

Kind clusters and the operator e2e suite need a higher file descriptor limit. If `ulimit -n` is below `4096`, the control-plane may crash or time out (leader election failures, API timeouts). Raise it before running kind-based targets:

```bash
ulimit -n 4096
```

## Demo Platform Overrides

`make demo-platform` defaults to two brokers and enables the Kafka proxy so the demo behaves like production access. To change broker count, set:

```bash
KAFSCALE_DEMO_BROKER_REPLICAS=3 make demo-platform
```

Note: with multiple brokers, the broker list contains per-pod DNS names (from the headless service). Host-based clients cannot resolve those cluster-local names, so use the proxy or keep replicas at `1` when running the demo workload on your machine.

To disable the Kafka proxy in the demo platform, set the flag to `0`. The demo
will port-forward the broker service instead of the proxy:

```bash
KAFSCALE_DEMO_PROXY=0 make demo-platform
```

## Generating Protobuf Code

We use `buf` to manage protobuf builds. All metadata schemas and control-plane RPCs live under `proto/`.

```bash
brew install buf      # or equivalent
make proto            # runs `buf generate`
```

The generated Go code goes into `pkg/gen/{metadata,control}`. Do not edit generated files manually—re-run `make proto` whenever the `.proto` sources change.

## Release Workflow

We publish container images and GitHub releases from tags. This keeps release artifacts reproducible and aligned with the Helm chart.

- Tag format: `vX.Y.Z` for stable releases, `vX.Y.Z-rc.N` or `vX.Y.Z-dev.N` for prereleases.
- Tag push triggers the Docker workflow to build and push `kafscale-broker`, `kafscale-operator`, and `kafscale-console` images to GHCR.
- The workflow also creates a GitHub release with autogenerated notes.
- The Helm chart defaults image tags to `appVersion`, so bump `deploy/helm/kafscale/Chart.yaml` `version` and `appVersion` for each release. Users can override `operator.image.tag`, `console.image.tag`, and `operator.brokerImage.tag` to pin a specific version, or set `operator.image.useLatest=true`, `console.image.useLatest=true`, and `operator.brokerImage.useLatest=true` for dev/latest installs.
- Release notes live in `docs/releases/` and should include a human-readable summary plus a "Security fixes" section listing any known CVEs addressed (or "None").
- Optional: create a prep branch named `prep-vX.Y.Z` to stage release notes and Helm chart bumps before tagging.

## Testing Expectations

Pull requests must include strict test coverage for the changes they introduce. At a minimum:

- Add or extend unit tests for all non-trivial logic.
- Run the relevant e2e suite(s); changes to broker behavior should run `make test-produce-consume` and any related e2e tests.
- Extend e2e coverage when you fix bugs so regressions are caught earlier.

To add headers to new files, run `python3 hack/license_headers.py`.

## Test Workflows (Details)

### Local MinIO / S3 setup

`make test-produce-consume` assumes there is an S3 endpoint in front of the broker, so we keep a local MinIO container (`kafscale-minio`) running to exercise a production-like S3 stack.

Default MinIO settings (used when `KAFSCALE_USE_MEMORY_S3=1` is not set):

| Setting | Value |
|---------|-------|
| Endpoint | `http://127.0.0.1:9000` |
| Bucket | `kafscale` |
| Region | `us-east-1` |
| Addressing | Path-style |

To point at a different S3-compatible endpoint, set the `KAFSCALE_S3_*` variables listed under Environment Variables. To skip MinIO entirely, set `KAFSCALE_USE_MEMORY_S3=1` and the broker uses the in-memory S3 client for faster, deterministic runs.

Related targets:
- `make test-produce-consume` runs the MinIO-backed produce/consume suite plus a Kafka CLI producer smoke test (configure `KAFSCALE_KAFKA_CLI_IMAGE` / `KAFSCALE_KAFKA_CLI_CMD` if needed).
- `make test-produce-consume-debug` adds Kafka trace logging (`KAFSCALE_LOG_LEVEL=debug`, `KAFSCALE_TRACE_KAFKA=true`).
- `make test-consumer-group` and `make test-ops-api` use embedded etcd + in-memory S3.
- `make test-multi-segment-durability` uses MinIO and restarts the broker across multiple segment flushes.
- `make stop-containers` stops leftover MinIO/kind helper containers before re-running tests.

### Demo workflow

Need an interactive run? `make demo` boots embedded etcd plus the broker + console, opens `http://127.0.0.1:48080/ui/`, and keeps everything running until you hit `Ctrl+C`. It is the quickest way to click around the UI while real messages flow through the broker/MinIO stack.

The demo wires `KAFSCALE_CONSOLE_BROKER_METRICS_URL=http://127.0.0.1:39093/metrics` so the console scrapes broker Prometheus metrics and populates the S3/metrics cards with live data. Any other process starting `cmd/console` can set the same env var (for example, `go run ./cmd/console`) to render broker-reported S3 state/latency instead of the mock placeholders.

The broker exports live throughput gauges (`kafscale_produce_rps` / `kafscale_fetch_rps`) so the UI can show messages-per-second alongside S3 latency. The sliding window defaults to 60 seconds; override it with `KAFSCALE_THROUGHPUT_WINDOW_SEC` before starting the broker if you want a shorter (spikier) or longer (smoother) view.

### Operator envtest (no kind)

`TestOperatorManagedEtcdResources` uses controller-runtime envtest to validate operator reconciliation without spinning up kind. Install envtest assets with `setup-envtest` or set `KUBEBUILDER_ASSETS` to a directory containing `kube-apiserver` and `etcd` binaries.

Recommended setup (using `setup-envtest`):

```bash
go install sigs.k8s.io/controller-runtime/tools/setup-envtest@latest
export KUBEBUILDER_ASSETS="$(setup-envtest use -p path 1.29.x)"
```

### Broker logging levels

The broker reads `KAFSCALE_LOG_LEVEL` at start-up. If the variable is unset we operate in warning-and-above mode, which keeps regular e2e/test runs quiet. Set `KAFSCALE_LOG_LEVEL=info` or `debug` (optionally together with `KAFSCALE_TRACE_KAFKA=true`) when you need additional visibility; the `test-produce-consume-debug` target wires those env vars up for you.

## Environment Variables

### Test and E2E

- `KAFSCALE_E2E` – Enable e2e tests.
- `KAFSCALE_E2E_KIND` – Enable kind-based e2e.
- `KAFSCALE_KIND_CLUSTER` – Kind cluster name.
- `KAFSCALE_KIND_RECREATE` – Force kind cluster recreation.
- `KAFSCALE_E2E_DEMO` – Run demo stack test.
- `KAFSCALE_E2E_OPEN_UI` – Open UI during demo test.
- `KAFSCALE_E2E_DEBUG` – Enable debug output in e2e tests.
- `KAFSCALE_BROKER_IMAGE`, `KAFSCALE_OPERATOR_IMAGE`, `KAFSCALE_CONSOLE_IMAGE` – Image overrides for kind e2e.
- `KAFSCALE_LOCAL_FRANZ` – Use local franz-go build in tests.

### Demo workload tuning

- `KAFSCALE_DEMO_BROKER_ADDR`
- `KAFSCALE_DEMO_TOPICS`
- `KAFSCALE_DEMO_MESSAGES_PER_SEC`
- `KAFSCALE_DEMO_GROUP`

### Broker / S3

- `KAFSCALE_S3_BUCKET`
- `KAFSCALE_S3_REGION`
- `KAFSCALE_S3_NAMESPACE`
- `KAFSCALE_S3_ENDPOINT`
- `KAFSCALE_S3_PATH_STYLE`
- `KAFSCALE_S3_KMS_ARN`
- `KAFSCALE_S3_ACCESS_KEY`
- `KAFSCALE_S3_SECRET_KEY`
- `KAFSCALE_S3_SESSION_TOKEN`
- `KAFSCALE_USE_MEMORY_S3`
- `KAFSCALE_THROUGHPUT_WINDOW_SEC`

### Broker logging

- `KAFSCALE_LOG_LEVEL`
- `KAFSCALE_TRACE_KAFKA`

### Operator / etcd

- `KAFSCALE_ETCD_ENDPOINTS`
- `KAFSCALE_ETCD_USERNAME`
- `KAFSCALE_ETCD_PASSWORD`

## Kafka Compatibility Tracking

To stay Kafka-compatible we track every protocol key + version that upstream exposes. Upstream Kafka 3.7.0 currently advertises the following highest ApiVersions (see `kafka-protocol` docs):

| API Key | Name | Kafka 3.7 Version | Kafscale Status |
|---------|------|-------------------|-----------------|
| 0 | Produce | 9 | ✅ Implemented |
| 1 | Fetch | 13 | ✅ Implemented |
| 2 | ListOffsets | 7 | ✅ Implemented (v0-4) |
| 3 | Metadata | 12 | ✅ Implemented |
| 4 | LeaderAndIsr | 5 | ❌ Not needed (internal) |
| 5 | StopReplica | 3 | ❌ Not needed (internal) |
| 6 | UpdateMetadata | 7 | ❌ Not needed (internal) |
| 7 | ControlledShutdown | 3 | ❌ Replaced by Kubernetes rollouts |
| 8 | OffsetCommit | 3 | ✅ Implemented |
| 9 | OffsetFetch | 5 | ✅ Implemented |
| 10 | FindCoordinator | 3 | ✅ Implemented |
| 11 | JoinGroup | 4 | ✅ Implemented |
| 12 | Heartbeat | 4 | ✅ Implemented |
| 13 | LeaveGroup | 4 | ✅ Implemented |
| 14 | SyncGroup | 4 | ✅ Implemented |
| 15 | DescribeGroups | 5 | ✅ Implemented |
| 16 | ListGroups | 5 | ✅ Implemented |
| 17 | SaslHandshake | 1 | ❌ Authentication not in scope yet |
| 18 | ApiVersions | 3 | ✅ Implemented (v0-3) |
| 19 | CreateTopics | 7 | ✅ Implemented (v0-2) |
| 20 | DeleteTopics | 6 | ✅ Implemented (v0-2) |
| 21 | DeleteRecords | 2 | ❌ Rely on S3 lifecycle |
| 22 | InitProducerId | 4 | ❌ Transactions out of scope |
| 23 | OffsetForLeaderEpoch | 3 | ✅ Implemented |
| 24 | AddPartitionsToTxn | 3 | ❌ Transactions out of scope |
| 25 | AddOffsetsToTxn | 3 | ❌ Transactions out of scope |
| 26 | EndTxn | 3 | ❌ Transactions out of scope |
| 27 | WriteTxnMarkers | 0 | ❌ Transactions out of scope |
| 28 | TxnOffsetCommit | 3 | ❌ Transactions out of scope |
| 29 | DescribeAcls | 1 | ❌ Auth not in v1 |
| 30 | CreateAcls | 1 | ❌ Auth not in v1 |
| 31 | DeleteAcls | 1 | ❌ Auth not in v1 |
| 32 | DescribeConfigs | 4 | ✅ Implemented |
| 33 | AlterConfigs | 1 | ✅ Implemented |
| 34 | AlterReplicaLogDirs | 1 | ❌ Not relevant (S3 backed) |
| 35 | DescribeLogDirs | 1 | ❌ Not relevant (S3 backed) |
| 36 | SaslAuthenticate | 2 | ❌ Auth not in v1 |
| 37 | CreatePartitions | 0-3 | ✅ Implemented |
| 38 | CreateDelegationToken | 2 | ❌ Auth not in v1 |
| 39 | RenewDelegationToken | 2 | ❌ Auth not in v1 |
| 40 | ExpireDelegationToken | 2 | ❌ Auth not in v1 |
| 41 | DescribeDelegationToken | 2 | ❌ Auth not in v1 |
| 42 | DeleteGroups | 0-2 | ✅ Implemented |

We revisit this table each milestone. Anything marked 🔜 or ❌ has a pointer in the spec backlog so we can track when to bring it online (e.g., DescribeGroups/ListGroups for Kafka UI parity, OffsetForLeaderEpoch for catch-up tooling).

## Coding Standards

- Keep all new code documented in `kafscale-spec.md` or cross-link back to the spec
- Favor context-rich structured logging (zerolog) and Prometheus metrics
- Protobufs should remain backward compatible; prefer adding optional fields over rewriting existing ones
- No stream processing primitives in the broker—hand those workloads off to Flink/Wayang or equivalent engines
- Every change must land with unit tests, smoke/integration coverage, and regression tests where appropriate; skipping tests requires an explicit TODO anchored to a tracking issue.
- Secrets live only in Kubernetes; never write S3 or etcd credentials into source control or etcd. Reference them via `credentialsSecretRef` and let the operator project them at runtime.
- When testing against etcd locally, set `KAFSCALE_ETCD_ENDPOINTS` (comma-separated), plus `KAFSCALE_ETCD_USERNAME` / `KAFSCALE_ETCD_PASSWORD` if auth is enabled. The broker will fall back to the in-memory store when those vars are absent.
